this principle the general things will
look like this we have two integrals one
on the left-hand side and one on the
right-hand side on the right-hand side
we have an integral of some quantity
which is to be decided and which depends
on the circumstances in which dimension
we are what we'd like to integrate and
so on and on the left-hand side we
integrate some sort of derivative of
that object okay some sort of derivative
which I just schematically denote by D
Omega now the next question is what do
we integrate over and we are integrating
on the left over some domain G and on
the right we integrate over the boundary
of this domain this is the boundary of G
okay so this formula represents a kind
of trade-off between an algebraic
operation namely taking the derivative
going from right to left and the genetic
operation which is taking the boundary
of your region so now we'd like to to
see how this general principle plays out
in different context okay and what we
discussed last week was one particular
in some sense the simplest possible
context of this in this context we took
we took D to be to be one dimensional
one dimensional
and so it's boundary V of D is zero
dimensional a consists of two of two
points so here is the picture here is DS
it's a curve in this case and being a
curve will denote it we usually denoted
by C C for curve okay and the boundary
has two points like this and also there
is an important aspect of this picture
which is that we have to choose
orientation we have to say which is the
initial point on which is the end point
we travel from here to here or from
there to get to this point so let's
choose our impatiens like this so we
travel from here to here let's call this
point a and this point B okay so the
formula which we learned last time looks
as follows we have on the Left we have
the line integral of a vector field F so
f is the vector field actually let me
rephrase that
so let me start from there let me start
from the right hand side because the
point is that the algebraic object Omega
actually found on the right hand side
not on the left hand side so we should
read I should really start on the right
hand side and on the right hand side I
have the values I have first of all a
function f on the plane and what I have
on on the right hand side is just
evaluate my function at the end points
at the point at the point B and I also I
also evaluated at the point a all right
and I take the difference so this one
comes with with coefficient plus one and
this one which is a minus one and that
is the testimony to the fact that this
is the end point and this is the initial
point which is due to the choice of
orientation that we've made so this is
the right-hand side and I can really
think of this as kind of integration
integration of of the function f over
the boundary over the boundary right
even though it's a zero dimensional
boundary so integration doesn't really
make sense with what I'm talking about
is really evaluating a function at these
two endpoints but it does fit the
general formula right because I have a
function that's my Omega in this case
and I have the boundary which is two
points B and a and integration over the
boundary is simply represented by the
difference of the values of F at B MA
okay what about the left hand side on
the left hand side I'm supposed to take
some sort of derivative of Omega so D
Omega and I have to integrate it over my
curve C right so my domain now is for C
and what I'm going to integrate is the
I'm going to take the line integral of
the gradient vector field of my function
so this is this derivative that this is
the real incarnation of the derivative
of my function in this particular
context in different context this will
mean different things in this particular
context the derivative simply means
taking the line taking the gradient
vector field and then I simply integrate
that gradient vector field over the
curve okay so what I get is the
fundamental theorem for line integrals
which we which we talked about last time
and my point now was to emphasize how it
fits this general principle so you can
think of this as the first application
of the general principle which is
explained on this board all right so
what we're going to do now we're going
to make the next step but you have a
question
the Omega why did I well I'm just saying
that if you don't like an upper opera or
arrow I will make it a sideways arrow
like this is that better okay I don't
read too much into the arrow it's just
to say what the Omega what does that the
Omega is in this context okay Omega in
this case is the function f that's right
which is what I wrote that
that's Omega in this case alright any
other questions
all right by the way for our worldwide
viewing audience and we have a pretty
wide worldwide audience is it turns out
the lecture to all the previous lectures
starting from lecture 1 are now being
uploaded on YouTube and so everybody can
now learn what happened previously on my
53 you know the the struggle the
intrigue the romance the broken part
it's all it's all there for our viewing
audience seasons 1 & 2 the unforgettable
seasons 1 & 2 ok let's go back to let's
go back to season 3 though I have to say
I saw that lecture 1 today and I it sort
of made me a little nostalgic about but
I remember the good old days when I
first came to this classroom and so all
of you that was a priceless moment
anyway so what we'd like to do now is we
want to make the next step we would like
to generalize it when the domain is
two-dimensional instead of being
one-dimensional so now we generalize
no mangy please two-dimensional and so
what I'd like to do is actually kind of
a maker compare and make a chart and
make a comparison between between the
one dimension on the two-dimensional
cases so this will be this will be the
one dimensional case and this will be
the two dimension key
so in the one dimensional case first of
all what is what is V okay G is a curve
which I denote it now by C because it's
a curve so let me draw another picture
like this and we have so we have this
two boundary points right and so what
should be the analog of this when we
when we generalize it to the
two-dimensional case it should be a
two-dimensional region obviously right
this is one dimensional and the analog
of this in two dimensions would have to
be adjusted two dimensional region so
what is it going to look like well it's
going to be some region on the plane
like this when I draw this curve I
really mean the interior of the office
of this curve right this this will be D
this will be D and the curve will
actually show up now as the boundary so
see this is a very important point that
now the domain is two-dimensional but
the boundaries one-dimensional so now
the boundary is an object which kind of
look like the original domain in the
previous example okay so that's that's
the that's the domain so this
two-dimensional region this is the
region two-dimensional region and now I
will just keep denoting it by D we will
not change the notation
okay what about what about the boundary
so the boundary here as we discussed
just consists of two points two points
so I'll just repeat I'll just draw them
again less two points right what about
here here the boundary as I said is this
yellow curve so let me draw it one more
time approximately so see now I am NOT
shading the interior of this of this
picture I'm really focusing on the curve
the curve is one-dimensional and the
curve shows up at the boundary of this
two-dimensional region so this is a
curve B of okay next what is Omega and I
again I am I would like to think in
terms of this formula so I would like to
define all of this data and then see
what what is it what what kind of a
quality idea from this right so what is
omega here Omega was f was the function
f and the derivative of Omega was just
the gradient of F the vector field which
is a gradient of f and so what did i do
I integrated I integrated F over the
boundary so I evaluated my function at
the point D na but on the left I was
taking the line integral over the curve
itself right let's align it over the
curve itself over the gradient of the
function f so now the question is what
should i do what should I take in this
two-dimensional generalization now okay
so I have to take something as Omega I
have to take something which I can pair
with this curve because Omega is
supposed to be integrated on the right
hand side right Omega is supposed to be
integrated on the right hand side of the
formula and on the right hand side I
integrate over the boundary over the
boundary
not over the region itself which is
two-dimensional but over the boundary
and that this curve so I have to think
of the most general integral that I can
do over a curve and we've learned such
integrals this align integrals right so
I should be integrating a vector field
that's a natural thing to do because in
this analysis so far we are integrating
over curves we're integrating vector
fields functions we also integrate but
in this case it seems more reasonable to
integrate a vector field so what I'm
going to take is a vector field F and
this vector field is going to have two
components E and Q and that's going to
be a vector field and so I will I will
integrate it on on the right hand side
over this boundary but I also have to
say what is the derivative of this what
do I mean by the derivative of this
vector field that should be some
expression involving the relative sum of
P and Q which I would then integrate
over over the two-dimensional region
itself and that would give me the
left-hand side right so I have to decide
what this is I have to find out what
this is and then I can build the formula
and it's not obvious from the beginning
it's not obvious what that what that
derivative should be well likewise it
was not so obvious that this should be
the gradient so let me just give you let
me just give you an answer and then
we'll see what what what is the meaning
of this okay so the answer for this
derivative is it's given by the
following formula which at first might
look kind of strange to you but then we
will load I will give you kind of an
explanation how to how this could be
derived and the four on the expression
is the following it's actually going to
be a function where as Omega here is the
vector field the derivative here is
actually going to be a function so it's
kind of its kind of opposite the
operation of differentiation in this
context that's something opposite to
what it did in the one-dimensional case
in the one-dimensional case the original
object was a function
but it's derivative turned out to be the
gradient vector field and now we start
with the vector field but we end up with
a function that function is a
combination of partial derivatives of T
and Q namely DQ DX minus DP dy okay
so in some sense it is like a derivative
it's it's not a derivative in any
obvious sense because there's we haven't
talked really about the riveters of
vector fields right all we know that it
should be some combination of
derivatives of the two components of the
vector field and there it is it is a
combination of partial derivatives of
the two components namely I take the
second component Q differentiate with
respect to X I take the first component
P differentiates back to Y and I take
the difference so it is of course in
this discussion it is assumed that my
function all my functions and my vector
fields are differentiable and in fact
I've continuous partial derivatives so
this actually makes sense ok so so let's
accept this let's accept this formula
for now I'll get back in a minute to the
meaning of this formula how to derive it
but let's accept it for now and so let's
now see at our brand-new example of this
general formula in the case when the
domain is two-dimensional let's see what
it's going to look like well again on
the left on the right hand side we know
already what it is on the right hand
side on the right-hand side we integrate
over this curve let me let me draw
another replica of this curve that's
that's the boundary of my that's a
boundary of my two-dimensional domain
and I mean I'm taking the line integral
of this vector field which I would like
I could write it as f dot dr if you want
but because I have already represented F
as a vector field with two components P
and Q I might as well just write it in
terms of T and Q so I will write it as G
DX plus Q dy and this is certainly that
just this expression it's the same this
is the same expression so that's what I
integrate on the right-hand side
what about the left hand side on the
left hand side now I should have
integrate over my domain D and actually
someone pointed out last time L at the
last lecture that in this formula I
didn't keep track of how many times I
put the integration sign it was an
approximate formula I just wanted to use
a sign of integration regarded just one
sign regardless of how many times I have
to integrate but now I'm writing a
precise formula this was just a guiding
principle now I'm writing a precise
formula so I would like to keep track of
the number of integrals which is the
dimension of the domain over which I'm
integrating so now my domain is
two-dimensional right and therefore it
should really be a double integral it
should really be a double integral and
it should be double integral of the
derivative of Omega about the derivative
of warming I have given by this formula
so what I get is DQ D DX minus DP dy da
and that's the formula I get so now if
you've never seen this before it looks
kind of surprising because so it's a
formula which equates a line integral of
a vector field to a certain double
integral of a function over the domain
here over the domain here over the
bounded domain of the of this domain
perhaps let me let me emphasize this by
drawing again the domain this is the
domain right this is domain and this is
its boundary so that's that is actually
the theorem which is the analog of the
phenomena fundamental theorem for line
integrals in the in the two-dimensional
case and it is called greens theorem
thank you okay so question
that's right very good
so there are still quite a few loose
ends here which I'm going to now unravel
okay so then the first question is a
very legitimate one which is which
orientation do I take on the right-hand
side this is a very good question
because if I just write this formula it
actually does not make sense right
because a line integral of a vector
field is only when if well defined when
I prescribe the orientation of the of
the curve over which I integrate right
and if I change the well there are two
possible orientations in this particular
case I'm dealing with the closed curve a
curve which does not have a boundary as
you see right so the way I will be
referring to Darren tation is I'll be
saying it's clockwise or
counterclockwise so there are two
possible orientations in other words I
can go like this and go around or I can
go like this that only two possible
choices so you can say well what's the
big deal doesn't matter which choice I
take there are not so many choices well
it doesn't matter because I get two
different answers this way granted the
two answers only differ by a sign but of
course sign is important because you
know if I want to say that this is
actually close to this I have to say
under what under what assumptions and
under in particular under what choice of
orientation and so the point here is
that the variant ation has to be chosen
counterclockwise for this formula to be
correct I should take it
counterclockwise this is not to say that
the integral with the opposite
orientation is not well-defined it is
also well defined it's just not going to
be equal to this it will be equal to
minus this C so this is a very important
point the second point that I would like
to make is this distinction between
between closed curves and an open course
or curves with boundary you see if there
is a difference this is the curve and
there is also curve in our previous
example these are both curves and the
word curve here refers to the fact that
they are one-dimensional objects but
they are very different
this one has boundary has non-empty
boundary
only which consists of two points but
this one does not have a boundary or
more properly it has an empty bound
there such curves are called closed
curves and it is interesting that it is
exactly such a curve which shows up at
the boundary of a two-dimensional region
so a curve like this is called the
closed curve closed curve I have empty
boundary and you should contrast that to
a curve with with a non-empty boundary
this is this is not closed curve this is
the curve well terminology here is
slightly misleading because a
mathematician would also say that this
is closed because it does include the
boundary points but when we say closed
in this class we will mean a curve like
this that closes on itself so to speak
right this one strictly speaking is also
closed because I cannot say it's an open
curve because I do include the boundary
point so let's just say it's a curve
with with boundary points so curve with
boundary with two boundary points
boundary points and of course that
immediately begs the question is it
possible to have such a curve not occur
but such a curve as a boundary of
something two-dimensional what do you
think hmm yes well any other answers
rather there are too many answers here
it
Byam if you think about it you will see
that this excel this it looks like I'm
giving you an example of this curve
being a boundary of the shaded region
but that's not true what about this part
what about this part now granted both if
I include this and this this would be
the boundary of something but then it
would have to go it would have to go to
infinity or we have to close somewhere
you see so the regions which we will
consider in the
in this in this case the regions like
this the reasons to which we will apply
greens theorem these regions are going
to be bounded they don't go to infinity
yes yes that's right let's go back to
this so the question is is defined to be
for a counter is counterclockwise define
is positive right so the terminology you
know we are free to make any terminology
we like we can call it positive negative
whatever we want right
some people like counterclockwise and
people like clockwise the standard
terminology for this is counter
clockwise orientation counter clockwise
and the terminology is that it's also
called positive but it's a matter of
choice
again I am free to take line integrals
over any curve I want I could take it
over a curve oriented this way I
oriented that way my interest here is to
choose an intention for which this
theorem is correct and I know that if we
for one of them it is correct it cannot
be correct for the other ones I have to
make a choice and the way actually the
better way to think about it is as
follows which will actually will need to
slide generalization of this for which
this rule that I'm explained now will
make more sense or will be more more as
sort of easy to remember right now it
looks kind of ad-hoc why do I choose it
counterclockwise so the actual rule is
the following that if you imagine
somebody walking on the it's just a
sketch
some somebody is walking on the boundary
of this domain right so it's like more
realistically I would have to draw this
domain on on this on this stage and I
would be walking on the boundary so the
rule is that my rent Larian tation of my
path should be such that the domain is
to my left always is to my left
well it's you have to choose in some way
right so this is well-defined if for you
if you walk this way it is to your left
if you walk this way to your right so it
has to be to your left
orientation to the left to the left
domain to the left to the left
it does sound a little ad-hoc but
actually it all makes sense in the end
so believe me it is a it is a good rule
and anyway it's a rule for which for
which everything works okay if you
choose a different one your you can do
that but don't please put a sign change
the sign on either side one on one side
not on both side okay so let me go back
to the issue of boundaries
[Applause]
first of all the domains that we will
consider domains like this will have to
be bounded bounded is something else not
bounded it's something which doesn't go
away to infinity off to infinity you see
what I mean so the entire plane is not
bounded and this is bounded this is
something we talked about when we talked
about double integrals when we do double
integrals we usually do them over
bounded domain if you have a bounded
domain its boundary would have to be
closed a closed curve you see so this is
important this is a very important
observation which is well maybe it's not
so obvious at first but it is it is
correct now there is one other subtle
point which I guess I should mention
which is that it looks like this curve
is slightly this is not really a cool
you can say it's not really curve it's a
combination of four different curves
right where is this one looks kind of
smooth although I kind of messed it up
little bit so it's not so smooth that I
was image I was trying to draw a smooth
curve this journey is not smooth it has
four corners at least right but in fact
for all intents and purposes were these
are both curves in other words I will
think of this entire thing as one curve
this curve will have four different
segments which are smooth and such
curves will we will call them piecewise
smooth in other words it's they're built
from pieces which are smooth the curve
itself the entire curve is not smooth
but it's a union of pieces which are
smooth in this case for so when I talk
about the boundary of this region I can
say that it's a combination of these
four pieces but I will usually just say
it's this curve I will ignore the fact
that there are some corners in there
because after all I can draw it in one
stroke like this right so it's not
really it doesn't much value to say that
well how many corners it has it's not
going to matter for us in the end when
we make one we calculate integrals over
curves like this of course we will do it
as a sum of integrals over each of the
smooth parts but that sort of a
calculation on matter it's a
technical issue it's not an issue it's
not a fundamental theoretical issue it's
radical issue is that the boundary of
this domain is this curve is closed
curve a boundary of a domain of a bound
of a domain like this on the plane
cannot consist of a single curve like
this which has a boundary of its own
in other words boundary of boundary is
empty if you know they mean boundary if
you take boundary of something and then
you take a boundary again this is empty
I'll use the standard signed a petition
for empty empty a boundary can be
non-empty this curve has a boundary of
its own but then it itself cannot appear
at boundary of a two-dimensional domain
if a curve appears at the boundary of
two-dimensional domain has to be closed
it all boundary should be empty you see
this you remain and there any questions
about this yes it should be a lot right
so here's the quota so the question is
that what how does this apply to greens
theorem well here's how it applies to be
inferior in the case of greens theorem
on the curve I have is a boundary of
something so this principle which I
explained the boundary of a boundary is
empty means that this one will have
empty boundary will have no boundaries
so that means that in greens theorem
I will on the right hand side I will
always integrate over closed curves you
see I mean yes
no no we could apply we could apply
greens theorem to to this one as well
let's let's let's let's look at this
example let's suppose that I let's
suppose that my domain here is a square
so this is my domain I can apply greens
theorem to this domain but then on the
right hand side let me use a same chalk
on the right hand side I will have the
square as my bounded okay this boundary
is slightly different in this than the
boundary in the previous example in the
sense that it's a curve but which has
corners but it is a curve and it is a
closed curve this curve does not have
any endpoint you see this is a closed
curve closed curve empty bounded this
point it has this special point let's I
grant you that it has some special
points which are different from the rest
because these are the singular points so
to speak they are not smooth but these
are not boundary points this is not the
boundary it's a mirror it's in the
middle right if I had something like
this those would be boundary points
right but this is still not a boundary
point if I have something like this this
at the boundary point you have question
it's the empty it's not no this is not a
definition of a closed curve this is the
this is a general principle which is
that if I start with a two-dimensional
object and take it boundary and then
take the boundary of that boundary this
will be empty this is illustrated here I
start with a two-dimensional domain I
take it boundary I get a curve which
already has no boundary
bless you I know it's a little confusing
so I'll just I'll just let this thing
sink in as I say you know and this is an
important point this is an important
distinction so for some from this point
of view greens theorem can be if you
have if you have a line integral and you
would like to to use greens theorem to
understand that integral you have to
make sure that you're integrating over
closed curve in Green's theorem on the
right hand side you will never have a
curve like this or like this or like
this here I mean you will never have a
curve which has boundary because the
curve in Green's theorem is not
independent object it is a boundary of
something on the left hand side and
because it is a boundary of something on
the left hand side it has no boundary of
its own yes
what's wrong with integrating over an
infinite two dimension what's wrong is
that the integral may diverge right it
might actually be infinite it may not be
well-defined if we integrate over a
bounded domain like this which sort of
doesn't go off to infinity we are
assured that if our function is defined
in the everywhere on this domain we are
sure to get a finite answer whereas if
we integrate over something infinite we
are not assured of that for instance
take take function 1 if you take
function 1 then the integral over any
domain is going to be just the area of
that domain if the if the domain is
bounded the area is finite if it's not
bounded it is infinite so it's not
well-defined but it could be
well-defined that's right it could be
well-defined and so often times we are
forced to consider integrals over
infinite domains and the way we do it is
quite obvious we just take we
approximate the infinite domain by
finite bigger and bigger finite domains
right and then we integrate over those
finite domains and we take the limit and
you're familiar with the notion of limit
so you see it roughly how it would have
to be defined but we are not assured in
general that the answer that the limit
will exist and so this integral would be
well defined here we don't want to deal
with these issues
so from the beginning we restrict
ourselves to domains like this which are
finite any other questions yes okay let
me let's let's talk about this let's
talk about it so the question is suppose
you have two curves which connect how do
we calculate the boundary of the of the
sum of these two curve so to speak right
so for example let's suppose that we are
let's suppose that we have let's suppose
we have a curve like this right so what
is the boundary of this curve just from
what I said just from intuitive
description of what boundary means you
can see that it's going to be this and
depending on what their intuition is let
me put alienation like this so the
boundary is this minus this so that's
the boundary of this total curve let's
call this point I want to call it ABC
but I don't like I don't want to do that
because I have C for this right so let's
can call them alpha beta and gamma I
think as long as it's not a epsilon
Delta you're fine with it right so so
the boundary of C is gamma minus alpha
right but on the other hand you can
think of this curve C as the sum of this
curve and this curve so it's what if let
me just draw it I mean they're not
shifted it's just two different sheets
of paper right I can think of this curve
at the sum of this one and this one so
let me see what what will I get if I
treat it like this there will be C 1 and
C 2 the boundary of C 1 would be beta
minus alpha R a
and the boundary of c2 would be gamma
minus beta right so if I take the sum
the boundary of c1 plus c2 is going to
be beta minus alpha plus gamma minus
beta so you see betas cancel out and I
get the same result so it's so
consistent the boundary of this curve is
gamma minus alpha no matter how you look
at it you look at it as just boundary of
this curve or you look at it at the
boundary of the sum of these two curves
because the point is that you have to
keep track of the signs if you keep
track of the signs actually this comes
with - this comes with Plus this comes
with - this comes with plus and so this
two guys annihilate each other
aq each other so this appear does this
answer your question okay
all right so let's move on and let's
talk about let's talk more about this
greens formula
okay now that we see it would have
figured out more or less what what the
what the meaning of the boundary is and
what kind of course we can get in on the
boundary of a two-dimensional region
let's talk about this very strange let's
talk about this very strange-looking
expression that we integrate on the
left-hand side so on the left-hand side
again we are integrating this D DQ DX
minus DP dy and I kind of want to write
it a DX dy this is what we call da when
this is what we call da when we talked
about double integrals I'm just
rewriting the formula but it just varies
it's like a different way I want to
focus now on the on the integrand on the
algebraic objects we have discussed the
geometric objects now with discuss with
you there are two break objects so in
what sense in what sense is this the
derivative why should we think that this
is a derivative so let me give you kind
of a intuitive explanation of this but
let's do it again by analogy by analogy
with the one-dimensional case
in the one-dimensional case we were
integrating the function on one side and
we were integrating the edge gradients
on the other side right so in the one
dimensional case this is a 2-dimensional
case and one dimensional case again I
just want to put them next to each other
is not nabla F D are equals well let's
write it like this F of B minus F of a
but what is not lay up dot d R we can
write it in coordinates it is d P DX DX
plus DQ dy dy that's what we call number
left oh yeah right so you see this is
the derivative this is what we call the
derivative and in fact if you look at
this formula what do you see what do you
recognize sorry
do I should share tangent no I shouldn't
here I have the sign but this is these
are two different formulas right why do
you think that I should change sign
nabla F double F is a vector field which
has two components DT DX I plus DQ dy J
right when I take line integral of this
vector field I have to take the first
component multiplied by DX the second
component occupied by dy that's what I
integrate but my question is have you
ever seen an expression like this before
in season two it made its appearance
right you know the answer what is it
somebody says differential thank you
yeah so this is a differential so in
fact this is DF this is here the
differential of f so you can think that
you are integrating doing the line
integral of the gradient of the of the
function but actually a better way to
think about it is the integral of the
differential the differential is an
example of what mathematicians call
differential forms and you can see that
every time we differentiate we have to
have some needs DX or dy here on the one
because we're integrate we're doing a
single integral or DX dy both both of
them because we're doing double integral
and sometimes we have DX dy DZ right so
this object all those objects are
mathematically called differential forms
and actually a slightly more consistent
theory of integration can be developed
in which the objects that we integrate a
differential forms we take a slightly
different point of view which because we
want to think about the this integrals
more in terms of applications like work
done by force
and and other things like a flux of a
vector field that we will talk about
later and this is the reason why we are
thinking about integrating vector fields
rather than differential forms but
algebraically it's easier to think of
this as integrating the differential
form which is just the differential of
the function so in the case in the
one-dimensional case in the case of the
fundamental theorem for line integrals
what we are doing passing from this from
the right-hand side which is a which we
have where we have a function right hand
side we have function and on the left
hand side we have this what I call the
dis derivative this derivative actually
is just the differential of F you can
think of integrating just to
differential this function yes shouldn't
be a derivative of what I'm sorry that's
right I I made a mistake I'm sorry it's
DF that's right sorry and that's why you
didn't answer
that's why I didn't answer my question
sorry it was my fault yeah I was I got I
got carried away with all this DF DT and
D and DF myself yes of course there is
no P and Q in this formula right P and Q
shows up here because we have P and Q
here here there is just what we are
given is just the function f and what I
should have written is just the
derivative of F in both cases right okay
now it's much better do you see now what
I mean
okay is it better
okay so so what did we do to get this
formula from from F what did we do we
took the function f and we we took two
possible derivatives of F respect to X
and respect to Y right so we took F and
we replaced it by DF DX plus v f dy dy
right so what is the saturation I
differentiate I take partial derivative
partial derivative and at the same time
x DF partial X partial derivative and
multiplied by DX plus y partial
derivative and multiplied by dy that's
what it is right so the two possible
partial derivatives I take partial
derivative by DX take second partial
derivative by dy so let's take this as a
guiding principle now I would like to
apply it here so now my starting point
will be P DX plus Q dy and I want to get
to see what I can get from this by
applying the same idea at the same
procedure okay so let me start with the
first term P DX when I start with P DX
I apply the same the same rule so I take
the derivative of T with respect to air
and I multiply by DX and I keep the old
DX which I had before right so I just
treat it like this I apply my
differential to T but I keep this this
extra factor as well so I get this term
plus DP dy and I have dy now have you
ever seen DF DX
no and for very good reason right
because we see DX dy because this
represents the area of an elementary
part of parallelogram with sides Delta X
Delta Y the area is Delta X Delta Y and
this is what eventually gives us this
term DX dy which we call da in the
double integral but Delta X Delta X
makes no sense right Delta X Delta X
does not represent any area whatsoever
to get an area you have to have
increments in two transversal
coordinates like X&Y or maybe RN theta
if you switch to polar coordinates if
you like okay or DX dy DZ if you're
doing triple integrals but Delta X Delta
X makes no sense and neither does this
so whenever you have DX DX this just is
it's prohibited so you have to cross it
out or more properly you should say it
is equal to zero it's like well it sort
of represents the area of this segment
which is zero right to have an area you
have to have something to dimensional
now this on the other hand is fine is dy
DX the only problem is that we switch
the order in which we normally take the
area which is usually the earth divide
so the rule in fact is this should be
replaced by minus DT dy
yes t1 this is an issue of orientation
remember we talked about different types
of orientation and we know that if we
when we talked about general changes of
coordinates and the double integrals we
saw that if you switch to course
the Jacobian if you get under the
integral get the minus sign we kind of
skirted that issue by saying well we'll
just take the absolute value of the
Jacobian but at this point actually we
can't avoid this issue and the correct
solution to this issue is to say that
dy/dx is equal to minus B are
non-negative DX dy so when we apply this
procedure to PV X this is what we get
but I also have the second term Q dy so
let me calculate what I get for Q dy for
Q dy I get DQ DX DX dy this is good
first of all that two different
variables and second of all they are
already in the right order do nothing
then I also have DQ V Y D Y dy
again I got dy dy Monda makes no sense
cross it out okay you see what I'm doing
right I'm just taking Q and Q gives me
this like this but I also have the
second factor dy which I keep and it is
the second factor which tells me that
the second term should disappear
so let me collect all the terms that I
got if I start with P X P DX plus Q dy I
end up with minus DP d y plus DQ DX DX
dy
PC and that's exactly the formula that I
get on the left
well I write it as DQ DX minus DP dy but
I just switched the water yes so the
rule is when you're the quantity
function that you have each of the
functions that you have you should take
partial videos partial with respect to X
and multiply by DX plus partial with
respect to Y multiplied by dy right so
this here is how it works for this one
for this term I take partial respect to
X and multiply by DX but don't forget I
had DX from the beginning moles so I
just keep it like plus partial is back
to y x dy and keep the DX that's what I
have but in addition I have this term
for this term I get this answer so I get
a priori four terms but out of these
four terms only two are nonzero this one
and this one I put them together and I
get the same sir and that's exactly the
answer which greens theorem tells me I
should put here so this is the
explanation of this expression this
expression at first glance looks
unnatural but now I have shown that you
can obtain it in exactly the same way as
the expression for the differential of a
function which certainly is quite
natural we know that the differential
function is actually very meaningful
okay yes
that's right so this is a saddle point
question is why do I put the minus sign
this is a saddle point because when we
did double integrals we actually kind of
swept it under the rug because when we
we oftentimes would write DX dy and
often times but also write dy DX
depending on which order of integration
would choose right because what we did
we represent the double integrals as
iterated integrals we would first
integrate over X and then over Y or
first over Y and then over X right
depending on that we would we would just
write DX dy or dy DX but in fact the
correct meaning of this expression
should involve
also the choice of orientation and the
temptation if you do that the DA the the
measure of integration for double
integrals should really be gear dy + dy
DX should be - that the reason why we
didn't do it because essentially we were
actually always integrating with respect
to the same measure just the fact that
we do the integral in one order or the
other order does not change there's not
introduced the sign but if we do with
the integration over surfaces keeping
track of the indentation then this would
actually become much more essential our
next topic will be more general surface
integrals where we will talk about
orientation and at that moment this will
become more clear right now it looks a
little strange that why we why we didn't
care about it before and now suddenly I
care about it well because I didn't we
didn't have to explain it before but now
we have to so that's roughly the answer
that's right
well the question is about questions
about line integrals in the case of a
line integral right we were supposed to
to take this vector field DF DX I plus
DF d YJ and we were supposed to take the
dot of this with gr when you take the
dot with gr you get this expression I
have explained now this expression as
one obtained from F by this rule by this
procedure the reason why I explained
this is I wanted to show there is some
uniformity between these two formulas
without the explicit explanation these
two formulas look completely disjoint
right in this case I take this
expression case I think that looks very
arbitrary very ad hoc right so it looks
like you have to simply memorize this
expression there's no other way to see
like why is it DQ DX
why is it not DQ dy minus DP DX for
example right that's a natural issue
initial question that arises here what I
try to explain is that actually this is
not an arbitrary expression this is an
expression which can be obtained by some
Universal procedure that procedure can
also be used to explain the formula from
last week so you don't have to you don't
have this is something which is not in
the book and you don't have to memorize
it I think it's a good idea to memorize
it because then you if you not memorize
to understand it because then you don't
have to memorize this formula if you
understand this procedure this just
falls out as I have just explained but
you don't have to do it this was just
the next one I would like I wanted to
give you an intuitive explanation of
what this formula is about and the
connection between the two formulas okay
but if you like you may just memorize
this to formal separately and not
necessarily think of them as two special
cases of something something general yes
here that's right PGX let's say you can
think of this as integral of a vector
field let's read oh you asking what is
the material of a function f over a
curve okay so that's a very good
question - so remember we also talked
about when we talked about line
integrals there were two types of line
integrals right there were line
integrals of vector fields online index
of functions and then line integrals of
functions was kind of it's like one of
those cousins nobody wants to talk about
right so it's like it's there somewhere
but we suddenly we don't talk about them
anymore right but actually because the
reason is this is it is very useful
those integrals are very useful but
those integrals are not as easy to fit
in this in this formula so to speak but
since you've asked me ah those were an
interval secret speaking those were not
exactly integrals of functions we kind
of thought of them as integrals of
functions but we never wrote integral of
F right we never wrote we never wrote
integral of F and this doesn't make
sense unless you need to create over
points for example here you can think of
this as an integral over two points of a
function which would be just evaluating
one point - evaluating the other point
whenever write this as an integral over
a curve or over two-dimensional domain
for that matter over curve we can only
integrate f GS or D you have to put some
measure here you have to put the es or
DX or dy something like this right so D
s is actually also a differential form
it's a kind of object like DX and dy and
I spend some time about the week ago
talking about this right so you have to
keep you have to remember that and if
you treat this not as an integral of a
function but integral of this expression
right then it actually fits into this
general theory okay yeah
where did you come from
it was just a well for example when we
go from a function to its differential
right it's just that's the way it is
that's the formula which gives you the
formula for the differential involves
partial derivatives with respect to X DX
plus the same for Y right the formula
was explained before because if this was
the formula for the linear for the
linear approximation of your function
right now we are developing a formalism
which allows us to relate integrals over
domains in their boundaries right and it
turns out that within that formalism
there is a certain procedure that which
you have to make starting with an object
on the right-hand side to get the object
on the left-hand side and we have now
seen two examples of this in action this
is the first example which was last week
here you actually have a function and on
the left then you have to take a
differential and now as a new example
here we start with a vector field with
components P and Q and then that that's
this expression but if you if I if I had
just written this expression without any
explanation you know you would say what
does it mean how did you get this
formula I have tried to give to give you
an explanation of that formula in a way
which will also make the parallel and
similar an analogous to this formula
okay let's move on now and do a few
examples of this as you can imagine this
actually has some very has important
applications because you can now trade
an integral on one side of this formula
for an integral on the other side and
often times one of these integrals is
very complicated and maybe not even
possible to evaluate easily and the
other one may be very easy to evaluate
ok and so that's what we are going to
try that's what we're going to do and
this is how we
going to apply this material apply this
formula so here is an example
suppose that your curve C is a boundary
of a parallelogram like this
this is your curve C and it is it will
be positively oriented which means that
you go counterclockwise okay this is
your curve C and suppose you're asked to
evaluate the line integral over C of the
following expression X e to the minus 2x
so X 3 to the minus 2x DX plus X cubed
plus 2x squared y squared dy okay so
this is a this is exactly the kind of
expression that I'm talking about in
this formula in Green's in Green's
theorem you have general expression is
pdx plus qdy but is that as I already
explained in order to apply greens
theorem you have to make sure that the
curve over which you integrate here is
closed has no boundary right so let's
see can we can we actually have a chance
to apply greens theorem to this line
integral for this we have to make sure
that the boundary of this curve is empty
is it empty yes it is empty it is a
closed curve so we're in good shape we
can actually replace it by the left hand
side on Green's theorem
why would you want to do this well
someone might say let's just I'll just
outer calculate it like this and to
which I would say good luck because see
first of all you'll have to break it
into four parts you have to integrate
over each of these segments each of the
segments you have to parameterize once
you parameterize it you have to
substitute parameterization here and
then go and find the antiderivative
derivatives of those functions okay
maybe in this case it's not so bad but I
could have written something much more
complicated obviously which for which
you wouldn't be able to find any
derivative which I will on the on the on
the exam right and that would be the
first indication for you to know that
you shouldn't do it in a straightforward
way you should not do it directly it's
just way too complicated okay so you
think of other ways to evaluate to
evaluate this and here it is beneficial
to use greens theorem
put that greens theorem tell me it tells
me that this is also this is equal to
the double integral over the interior of
this curve which is the parallelogram
parallelogram itself this is d of what I
have to take let me write it here I have
to take vq DX minus DP dy and what are
the P and Q this is P right and this is
Q so let's take the derivative of Q with
respect to X I get 3x squared right plus
four X Y squared
and now I have to take also the dpdy
and T is this and lo and behold P
actually does not depend on Y at all it
only depends on X you see so we kind of
lucked out here this complicated looking
function will actually disappear when we
go to the other side of greens theorem
because this actually will be zero this
this is zero so I don't have to add
anything to this in general I have to
take the P dy but DP dy is 0 and
everybody everybody agrees with that DP
dy 0 it does not depend on Y it's
partial derivative with respect to Y is
0 so this is already simplification so
you can imagine here is the quickest you
know exercise that you can give to
somebody and what kind of which look
complicated but actually the easiest to
make to calculate that would be if I
actually wrote here something which only
depends on Y let's suppose that I give
you a formula here where I wrote here a
very very complicated but only depending
on why I would read some square root of
1 plus e to the sine Y or something you
know and then you look at it so it
really horrible but then you apply
greens theorem and you see that DQ DX
actually zero no matter how complicated
this function could be in Y if it
doesn't depend on X this would be 0 and
then this would be 0 and this would be 0
and the answer would be 0 so you don't
have to calculate anything so you
already see the power of this method
that sometimes you get the answer right
away even though the original integral
looks very complicated well this would
be sort of a gimmick if I give you this
it would be sort of a gimmick you'll be
saying ok so it's just you know just
playing with that but this is sort of a
more serious example right which is kind
of intermediate intermediate level where
one of the functions disappears and the
other one does not disappear so you
actually have to calculate something
meaningful you have to calculate this of
course DX dy or da if you want so now we
have to have to remember what we learned
about double integrals you have a
question
right so question is do I put you have
to put dxdy or I can put there are two
issues here with D F D Y okay so in this
discussion of what of this procedure you
have to keep track of this and that is a
discussion which goes into the issue of
House of the meaning of the formula so
it's a kind of a fundamental stuff about
deriving this formulas right this is one
aspect of it another aspect of this is
when we do double integrals we treat
them in iterated integrals where we
first integrate over one of the two
variables and then we integrate over the
second variable both of them are okay
they don't introduce any sign the
switching that I'm talking about is the
switching in the formula when you pass
from here to here but once you are doing
a double integral you can do it in
either way you see what I mean so don't
worry about it this the sign only
happens in this discussion so it's to
explain why there is minus here and
there is no minus here but when you're
actually doing the double integral over
of an expression like this the rule
which the rules which we have used to
evaluate these integrals and those rules
involves integrating over X and then
over Y or over Y and then over X both of
the tools will give you the same answer
okay so let let's actually let's
actually evaluate so you have
[Applause]
so let's say so this is going to be now
we do it as an iterated integral and you
choose as I said you can choose
whichever you like and for the first
variable and whichever you like in the
second variable so let me see let me do
let me say to hear Y from 0 to 2 and
there here the X will be from 0 to 5 and
then I will have 3 x squared + 4 X Y
squared here M DX and then I'll have you
so here you will have X cube right plus
2 x squared Y squared from 5 to 0 which
is what's 5 cube 125 right plus 50 Y
squared right tell me if I'm making
mistake somewhere and then you do this
with the outer integral I'm doing this
because I'm trying to remind you because
this is something we haven't done since
I guess the exam so you I hope you
haven't forgotten but we we certainly
have to use this knowledge right in this
in education so 125 plus 15y squared dy
and that's going to be 125 Y plus 25
plus 50 over 3y cubed - 2 and 0 so you
have 250 +
okay whatever so this is how you this is
how you compute yes that's right so this
is a very easy way to calculate what
could would have been a nightmare
calculation if you had approached it in
the most in the most direct way right
let's represent this is the answer for
the integral of this vector field over
this curve over this curve now we are
lucky here I want to emphasize it one
more time this is something which we
cannot apply to a general line integral
we can only apply it to a line integral
over a curve like this which has no
boundary if my question was to calculate
over this segment or over even over this
or even over this something which has a
boundary I would not be able to do this
of course what I could have done say if
the integral was like this there's this
I would say okay
I'm missing this part but if it if this
part were there it would be this so let
me say that this then is equal to this
part minus this integral so I would be
able to trade this integral over three
segments for a double integral plus or
minus the integral over one segment so
in other words not everything is lost
even if your curve is not bounded it is
not closed which you could trade a
complicated curve for an easy curve also
but here we actually like it because the
curve is closed so we just trade the
double the single integral line integral
for double integral which is much
simpler to calculate yes I'm sorry
that's what Wilcox square
does this curve look like a square
doesn't have to look like a square first
of all it he'll look like a
parallelogram not a square right at
least I meant it to be to have an equal
sides but a curve to answer your
question let's look let's do another
example where the curve is not a square
or a parallelogram for that matter let's
do another example suppose that you're
your domain you're you have to evaluate
a line integral of something
which is not which is not which is not
which has two components so I would like
to do a picture like this okay so I
would like to say that here again I can
use greens theorem
this is equal to vgs plus qdy but where
where the region my two-dimensional
region will be the analyst which is
confined between these two circle the
first circle let's say would have radius
1 and second circle we have radius 2
okay in the brief in all the previous
discussion I assumed that my region
should speak didn't have hold in other
words the boundary if I don't consists
of only one a single curve and now this
region sort of has a whole as a whole in
here right so the boundary now consists
of two circles there is an outer circle
in there is an inner circle but it turns
out that greens theorem is applicable to
such regions as well but you have to be
very careful with the way you put
orientation on the boundary there
intention on the exterior circle we have
already figured out it's
counterclockwise and that's going to
stay the same in all in all cases but
but now the question is which
orientation you should put on the inner
circle clockwise exactly because see
this exactly situation where the
counterclockwise clockwise rule doesn't
apply counter clockwise rule only
applies to the exterior bound but for
the inner boundaries it's going to be
the opposite it going to be clockwise
and the reason is that the universal
rule involves for both this
you have to think of a person walking
here and if you walk on the bus the
domain has to be always on your left so
that makes it means that you have to
walk counterclockwise outside but if you
go counterclockwise on the inner circle
on your left will not be the domain but
it will be there something else right so
you have to walk like this so like this
here I want to draw that way but like
this here to have the domain on your
left so which brings that to the to this
second example in which in which let's
say let's say you have some function
let's do that put oh yes here this
brings me to the second example where
[Applause]
let's say you have the following
concrete functions so let's say oh let's
see
the C now represents the union of both
of these boundary curves right taking
with appropriate orientation and so
let's say you are evaluating the
following thing you have cosine X DX
plus x squared sine Y dy so this is P
and this is Q right so we use we use
greens theorem and Green's theorem tells
us that this is going to be an integral
over over this annulus of DQ again DQ
the DX minus DP dy which is 2x sine Y
- dpdy so again I chose the function to
be such that actually this disappears to
make it easier okay and now I need to
evaluate this double integral and of
course here you have to remember all the
tricks which you've learned in dealing
with double integrals when you do double
integrals you have this entire toolbox
available to you you don't have to do it
in a straightforward way first x and y
you can for example use polar
coordinates and surely this region calls
for polar coordinates so what you need
to do is you need to switch to polar
coordinates and the integral that you
will get will be as follows you will
have 0 to 2pi and over theta and then
from 1 to 2 I recall that this has
radius 1 with radius 2 so theta you
integrate over from 0 to 2pi but are you
integrate from are to 2 and then you
substitute the polar coordinates so you
get 2 R cosine theta right and then you
have in a sign of our sine theta right
then you have r dr d-theta q DX maybe I
made I made it too much to complicate
let me just get rid of this it's just
for the sake of their for the sake of
practice so let's just get it - I think
it's good enough ok and then oh but
don't don't forget to put an extra R in
da so then you have this extra R the Rd
theta and then of course this you can
already do very easy okay
so we'll continue on Thursday